blog: Redefining Privacy by Making Hard Choices (#4195)
simplex-chat/simplex-chat: blog/20240516-simplex-redefining-privacy-hard-choices.md

Whenever possible, we strive to achieve significantly higher levels of privacy and security. For example, unlike most, if not all, applications (including Signal), [we encrypt application files with per-file unique key](https://simplex.chat/blog/20230925-simplex-chat-v5-3-desktop-app-local-file-encryption-directory-service.html#encrypted-local-files-and-media-with-forward-secrecy). Consequently, once a message is deleted, there's no means to open a file that someone may have stolen in hopes of acquiring the key later. Similarly, apps like Session have done away with forward secrecy, a decision which caused them [not to be recommended](https://www.privacyguides.org/en/real-time-communication/#additional-options) for "long-term or sensitive communications". And [misinformation](https://simplifiedprivacy.com/spain-has-banned-telegram-defending-session/) around this makes it dangerous and irresponsible to recommend without such necessary disclosures for people’s awareness.

> Session’s decision was based on [the incorrect statements](https://getsession.org/blog/session-protocol-explained) about double ratchet being impossible in decentralized networks, and underplayed importance of forward secrecy, break-in recovery and deniability - the absence of these qualities all that make Session a much weaker choice for private messaging. For transparency, this was something that was debated with their team [here](https://twitter.com/SimpleXChat/status/1755216356159414602). We also made [a separate post](./20240314-simplex-chat-v5-6-quantum-resistance-signal-double-ratchet-algorithm.md#end-to-end-encryption-security-attacks-and-defense) about these qualities of end-to-end encryption and their presence in different messengers.

Reviewer: - the absence of these crucial qualities all make Session a much weaker choice for private messaging. 

- We also made a separate post about these qualities of end-to-end encryption and their presence in different messengers, to show that now all end-to-end encrypted apps are created equal or offer the same level of protections.

> Session’s decision was based on [the incorrect statements](https://getsession.org/blog/session-protocol-explained) about double ratchet being impossible in decentralized networks, and underplayed importance of forward secrecy, break-in recovery and deniability - the absence of these qualities all that make Session a much weaker choice for private messaging. For transparency, this was something that was debated with their team [here](https://twitter.com/SimpleXChat/status/1755216356159414602). We also made [a separate post](./20240314-simplex-chat-v5-6-quantum-resistance-signal-double-ratchet-algorithm.md#end-to-end-encryption-security-attacks-and-defense) about these qualities of end-to-end encryption and their presence in different messengers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Session’s decision was based on [the incorrect statements](https://getsession.org/blog/session-protocol-explained) about double ratchet being impossible in decentralized networks, and underplayed importance of forward secrecy, break-in recovery and deniability - the absence of these crucial qualities all make Session a much weaker choice for private messaging. For transparency, this was something that was debated with their team [here](https://twitter.com/SimpleXChat/status/1755216356159414602). We also made [a separate post](./20240314-simplex-chat-v5-6-quantum-resistance-signal-double-ratchet-algorithm.md#end-to-end-encryption-security-attacks-and-defense) about these qualities of end-to-end encryption and their presence in different messengers, to show that now all end-to-end encrypted apps are created equal or offer the same level of protections.
```

## Network decentralization

<img src="./images/simplex-explained.svg" width="40%" class="float-right">

> It's important to recognize that a model of decentralization where all servers are openly known and accessible to all clients, that some users ask for, actually results in a less decentralized network, and as the network grows it often requires to introduce a central authority to protect from malicious participants. Therefore, we've deliberately opted for a slower path towards achieving a higher degree of decentralization where there is no central server registry or network authority. For example, p2p designs may offer higher initial decentralization but often compromise on privacy and eventual decentralization. In essence, our approach prioritizes a balance between initial decentralization, privacy, and higher degree of decentralization down the line.

Reviewer: - and as the network grows it often requires an introduction of a central authority to protect from malicious participants.

> It's important to recognize that a model of decentralization where all servers are openly known and accessible to all clients, that some users ask for, actually results in a less decentralized network, and as the network grows it often requires to introduce a central authority to protect from malicious participants. Therefore, we've deliberately opted for a slower path towards achieving a higher degree of decentralization where there is no central server registry or network authority. For example, p2p designs may offer higher initial decentralization but often compromise on privacy and eventual decentralization. In essence, our approach prioritizes a balance between initial decentralization, privacy, and higher degree of decentralization down the line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important to recognize that a model of decentralization where all servers are openly known and accessible to all clients, that some users ask for, actually results in a less decentralized network, and as the network grows it often requires an introduction of a central authority to protect from bad actors with malicious intent. Therefore, we've deliberately opted for a slower path towards achieving a higher degree of decentralization where there is no central server registry or network authority. For example, p2p designs may offer higher initial decentralization but often compromise on privacy and eventual decentralization. In essence, our approach prioritizes a balance between initial decentralization, privacy, and higher degree of decentralization down the line.
```

## Company jurisdiction

<img src="./images/20240516-parliament.jpg" width="40%" class="float-right">

With regards to jurisdictions, nowhere is perfect. For that reason we plan to establish the foundations for protocol governance in [various jurisdictions](https://simplex.chat/blog/20240323-simplex-network-privacy-non-profit-v5-6-quantum-resistant-e2e-encryption-simple-migration.html#the-journey-to-the-decentralized-non-profit-protocol-governance). But we’d like to explain some misconceptions about the UK, where SimpleX Chat Ltd. is registered.

> The first common myth is about the the Online Safety Act (OSA) - some people believe that it applies to the UK companies. It is simply incorrect - the OSA applicability isn't determined by the jurisdiction of a company. The OSA applies based on the nature and characteristics of the business and its services, as well as the number of its users in the UK. In case of SimpleX network, the OSA doesn't apply for both of these reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When it comes to protecting end-to-end encryption in its strongest forms, no jurisdiction is safe, and every country will have trade-offs, some more significant than others. But we did want to clarify some misconceptions about certain policies in the UK, for example the Online Safety Act (OSA). Some people believe that it applies only to UK companies, but the OSA applicability isn’t determined by the company’s jurisdiction. It applies based on the nature and characteristics of the business and its services, as well as the number of its users in the UK. In the case of SimpleX, the OSA doesn’t apply for both of these reasons.
```

> Another myth is about the UK position on communication encryption. The UK is also not anti-encryption. For example, it didn't attempt to ban the encryption; the legislative intent was to propose technical measures to block CSAM. As the discussion about the bill progressed, the parliament amended the bill, and the government publicly committed to not request the implementation of client-side scanning until a viable technology emerges that wouldn't compromise e2e encryption (which at this point appears to be a wishful thinking). The process's intentions and outcome don't look like an attempt to prohibit encryption. This may have been the desire of lobbyists, like certain anti-privacy non-profits, but it wasn't the aim of the UK government per their own communications on the matter. 

Reviewer: Another myth is about the UK position on communication encryption. The UK government is not anti-encryption. For example, it didn't attempt to have a blanket ban on strong encryption; the legislative intent was to propose technical measures to block CSAM. This has led to recommendations for backdoors into messaging services, which of course could be easily misused for other purposes and is wrong. There have been suggested amendments to force backdoors into messaging services, but those have not passed. As such, as the discussion about the bill progressed, the parliament amended the bill, and the government publicly committed to not request the implementation of client-side scanning until a viable technology emerges that wouldn't compromise e2e encryption (which at this point appears to be a wishful thinking). The process's intentions and outcome don't look like an attempt to prohibit encryption at large. This may have been the desire of lobbyists, like certain anti-privacy non-profits, but it wasn't the aim of the UK government per their own communications on the matter.

> Another myth is about the UK position on communication encryption. The UK is also not anti-encryption. For example, it didn't attempt to ban the encryption; the legislative intent was to propose technical measures to block CSAM. As the discussion about the bill progressed, the parliament amended the bill, and the government publicly committed to not request the implementation of client-side scanning until a viable technology emerges that wouldn't compromise e2e encryption (which at this point appears to be a wishful thinking). The process's intentions and outcome don't look like an attempt to prohibit encryption. This may have been the desire of lobbyists, like certain anti-privacy non-profits, but it wasn't the aim of the UK government per their own communications on the matter. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The other looming concern is about the UK’s position on communication encryption, and more specifically end-to-end encrypted messaging. Most recently, the legislative intent was to propose technical measures to block CSAM and was trying to explore ways to do this via backdoors or client-side scanning by companies and governments, which of course weakens encryption. However, and thanks to the hard work of privacy experts, researchers, academics and rights organizations throughout the UK, the Online Safety Bill did not pass a ban on end-to-end encrypted apps without such scanners that weakens encryption. The debate continues on whether or not such technology will ever be possible. For now, strong end-to-end encryption remains permissible and protected, and we hope to also add to the privacy advocacy and debates as a UK-based company to keep it legally protected.

```
